[pants]
[groans, pants]
Help me!
Please help me!
[pants]
Anne!
-Diana?
-Minnie May, she's sick.
-We need to wake Miss Cuthbert.
-She went to see the premier.
-Did your parents go as well?
-Yes!
What's wrong with Minnie May?
I don't know.
She's choking and coughing. It's horrible!
Croup.
We need the doctor.
-Matthew? Matthew, come quick!
-[Diana sobs]
Put this on you
before you catch your death.
Aunt Josephine is staying with us,
but she doesn't know what to do.
-She's never seen a cough like this.
-I have.
Matthew, ride to Carmody and fetch
the doctor. Minnie May is gravely ill.
-I'll go home with Diana.
-We'll see you there.
Oh, Anne, she's fearful sick.
She can scarcely breathe. [sobs]
I need to fetch the ipecac before we go.
Matthew won't be back for hours.
I will do everything I can until then.
-I've missed you so much.
-I've missed you too.
♪ First thing we'd climb a tree ♪
♪ And maybe then we'd talk ♪
♪ Or sit silently ♪
♪ And listen to our thoughts ♪
♪ With illusions of someday ♪
♪ Casting a golden light ♪
♪ No dress rehearsal ♪
♪ This is our life ♪
♪ You are ahead by a century ♪
-♪ This is our life ♪
-♪ You are ahead by a century ♪
[Millie May coughs]
Lean her over.
Make sure she's right above the steam.
We have to loosen the phlegm
that's choking her.
[coughs]
[exhales] We've used almost
all the ipecac. Only one more dose.
I want to get by with steam and night air
until we're forced to use it.
-She's burning up.
-Let's lift her up to the window.
Breathing cold air will help.
[rasps, coughs]
What on earth do you think you're doing?
Do you wish her
to freeze to death as well?
Cold air is a doctor's best friend
when it comes to treating croup.
You are not a doctor.
I do not condone this!
I know what I'm doing. Sorry,
if you could please stay out of the way?
-Well! [exhales]
-[Minnie May continues coughing]
Dear God, please save this child.
-It's all right, Minnie May.
-[coughs]
[gasps] Do you see the moon?
Oh, isn't she lovely?
She's watching over you.
I wish you had some peppermint or
eucalyptus, so I could make a plaster.
I'll fetch an onion.
Pardon me.
How much longer will it be
before that blasted doctor comes?
Oh, how I hate the country!
Sorry, it would really help
if you could keep out of the way.
What would help
would be a medical professional.
I expect they'll be another hour or two,
if they come at all.
Why do you say that?
Almost everyone went to Charlottetown
to see the premier.
-That is precisely why I left.
-It remains to be seen if the doctor went.
Next you'll be brewing eye of newt
in a cauldron!
Raw onion on the soles of the feet
helps to bring a fever down.
-You haven't ever heard of that?
-Why would I have?
Because it's an old wives' tale.
I might be one, but not the other.
Evidently, one doesn't have
to be either thing to know it.
That's true enough.
In any case, I believe it works, and I'm
not above a desperate measure or two.
If I had a desperate measure to offer,
I would,
but I know nothing of children
or their illnesses.
Mrs. Hammond had twins three times,
so I know quite a lot about it.
[Josephine] You were in service?
My whole life before Green Gables.
So the Cuthberts brought you on to
look after them in their dotage, did they?
No, I was supposed to be a boy, but when I
wasn't, they decided to keep and raise me.
How extraordinary.
I agree!
-Anne! Anne! Anne!
-[chokes]
[Anne] Bring her over to the table! Hurry!
Roll her onto her belly! Hold her feet!
Come on, Minnie May!
Cough! Cough, Minnie May! Cough!
-She's slipping!
-Miss Barry!
Come on, Minnie May! Come on!
-Cough, Minnie May! Cough!
-She's not breathing.
[Minnie May chokes]
Cough, Minnie May!
Cough! Come on! Cough!
Come on! Cough! Cough!
Cough, Minnie May! Cough!
-[Diana] Please, please.
-[coughing]
-That's good. That's very good.
-[gasps for breath]
[both sigh with relief]
-Thank God.
-Merciful Lord.
That's done it! Pull her up!
[Minnie May exhales deeply]
[exhales] You're going to be all better
very soon, and you have been very brave.
Oh, Anne...
Let's get her to bed.
I believe the worst is over.
I believe I need a brandy.
[exhales]
[horses whinnying]
[footsteps approaching]
[man] Your redheaded girl
is as smart as they make 'em.
She saved that child's life,
pure and simple.
I must admit she's got a presence of mind
quite unusual in a child her age.
Hmm. I'd... I'd best get her home.
Anne.
Anne...
it's time to go.
[birds twittering, squawking]
Oh, Matthew, isn't it a beautiful morning?
The trees look as if
you could blow them away with a breath.
Poof!
I'm so glad I live in a world
where there are white frosts, aren't you?
Yeah.
And I'm so glad Mrs. Hammond
had three pairs of twins,
or I mightn't have known what to do.
Life's funny like that.
Won't Marilla be surprised
when she hears what she missed?
Won't she just.
Matthew?
Matthew, are you all right?
Oh. Ooh, uh, good, you're back.
Um, how was Charlottetown?
Why are you sleeping
in the middle of the day?
Uh, it's all right, Marilla.
I expect Anne
will sleep the day away as well.
What's happened? What's wrong? Is she ill?
Oh, look, there's no need to fret.
How about I tell you over a cup of coffee?
I could use some coffee.
You know what I...
Oh, can I get you something?
You know...
what was the best thing
about getting sick?
Traveling west again.
I'll fetch you both some tea.
The train.
God, I love a train.
And those Rocky Mountains.
They're amazing.
Did my heart good.
It's a big world, son.
Remember that.
[exhales]
[knocking on door]
Good afternoon, Marilla.
Eliza.
I've come to apologize.
May I please see your wonderful...
remarkable Anne?
She's still sleeping,
but you're welcome to come on in.
[mutters]
Good day, Mrs. Barry.
[Mrs. Barry] Thank you, Matthew.
[Anne exhales]
Afternoon, Marilla. We missed you.
Did you see the premier?
What did he look like?
Well, he never got to be premier
on account of his looks,
but I was proud of being a Conservative.
Rachel, being a Liberal,
had no use for him.
Come along. Let's get you fed.
I expect you must be hungry.
I'm starving!
Did Matthew recount
the events of last night?
He did.
I must say it was fortunate
that you knew what to do.
I wouldn't have had any idea myself.
I never saw a case of croup.
You know what was extra wonderful
about it all?
I got to spend time
with my darling Diana.
It's been an agony not speaking at school,
an utter agony.
It's been a long month, indeed.
I was so sorrowful
to leave her this morning,
knowing it will all go back
to how it's been.
-[sniffles]
-Take a few more bites.
Why?
Because when I tell you
who just visited here,
your reaction will lift you clear out
of the region
of such material matters as appetite.
Mrs. Barry paid a call today...
and she hopes you'll forgive her
and be good friends with Diana again.
[gasps, shrieks]
I-I-I'll wash it later!
I-I can't tie myself down
to anything so unromantic as dishes
at this thrilling moment!
Anne! Take a coat!
Gilbert!
[gasping breaths]
Anne! Anne!
-[shrieks] Diana! Oh!
-[gasps, laughs]
Oh, aren't you almost
nearly perfectly happy?
Our separation has been
an excruciating torment,
but I'm so relieved it's finally over.
Mother could hardly keep us apart
as you saved Minnie May.
Even Aunt Josephine said she'd see you
again, and she doesn't like anyone.
Wasn't she only staying
while your parents were away?
Uh, no, no. She's come to stay with us
for at least a month.
I don't quite know how we'll stand it.
She's so particular.
But she suffered a loss. She's grieving,
so she's disinclined to stay home alone
since her companion passed away.
Her companion?
Her best friend forever and ever.
-[chuckles]
-[sighs]
[Diana] Aunt Josephine never married.
Neither of them did.
They lived with each other
their whole lives.
I'd live with you forever if I could,
but I know you'll leave me
the day you get married
to some wealthy and handsome gentleman.
I hate him already.
-How's Gilbert?
-You're not funny.
You see him almost every day after school,
do you not?
Not because I want to.
It's because I have to.
Mr. Phillips makes me go.
I've explained this to Ruby.
Do I have to explain it to you as well?
I want to beat Gilbert fair and square
when he comes back to school. [exhales]
Is his father almost well?
I think I'm a terrible person.
What? Why?
-I hadn't thought about it before.
-Hadn't thought about what?
It's very likely Gilbert's father
isn't going to get well.
So it's more than possible that when
Gilbert finally comes back to school...
he'll be an orphan.
[school bell ringing]
"Let not your heart be troubled.
Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
In my father's house are many mansions.
If it were not so,
I would have told you.
I go to prepare a place for you.
And if I go and prepare a place for you,
I will come again,
and receive you unto myself...
for where I am, there ye may be also."
[congregation] Amen.
[indistinct chatter]
[indistinct conversations]
It's all right. It's all right.
Oh, no, thank you.
[girl laughs]
You laugh,
but I think it's a fine chapeau.
Cosmopolitan.
All the city folks are wearing them.
Why don't you like it?
Other than the fact
that it's too big for your head?
Room to grow.
I'm sure it'll fit better
when you acquire some more brains.
[both chuckling]
Oh, show me mercy, Mar! Mercy, please.
Perhaps this might persuade you
to offer me a morsel of kindness?
I make no promises.
I would expect none.
May I?
[Rachel] Marilla?
Are you all right, dear?
I'm sorry, what?
Oh... No, thank you. I'm fine.
[blows]
[indistinct conversations]
Gilbert!
It was a lovely service.
It seemed fitting somehow.
Everything was so white and still.
I've always thought the minister
prays quite mournfully,
so this suited him nicely.
Baptisms must be grim.
Being an orphan has its challenges,
but you already have so many advantages,
you'll be much better off than I was.
And...
I didn't know my parents.
They died when I was a baby,
so I couldn't fend for myself
the way that you can.
And I don't remember my parents at all,
but you'll always be able
to remember your father.
You know, when you think about it,
you're really very lucky.
You think I'm lucky?
Compared to me? Yes.
And why is this about you?
It's not. I was just trying to--
See you.
Uh...
[Anne grunts]
[Anne] Don't mind me, Gilbert Blythe.
I was only trying to help. Huh!
Fine then! Don't get the benefit of my
extensive knowledge about being an orphan!
[sighs]
No matter how sad you look.
[exhales] All right.
No need to think about him anymore. Done.
I have wasted quite enough energy
on some dumb boy.
I'm not going to think
about Gilbert Blythe for one more second.
[exhales]
Brain, stop it.
-Romance is a pesky business.
-[gasps]
[exhales]
-Miss Barry.
-No sense to be made of it.
-Hello, Anne.
-Hello.
Sorry to interrupt.
No, no. I was...
Uh...
May I enter your humble abode?
Of course.
[Josephine grunts]
Ah.
Cozy little retreat.
I-I should let you know immediately
that what you heard just now
had nothing to do with romance.
-I see.
-I couldn't be less interested in Gil...
That boy.
I've got much better things to do.
You certainly seem like someone
with many possible outcomes.
Oh, you've no idea how much
it heartens me to hear you say that.
My advice is to let your ambitions
and your aspirations be your guide.
But I have so many.
Oh, good.
Plenty of time yet. If you're lucky.
Right.
Lucky.
There's more than enough time
for you to figure out what you want
and what you're good at.
I'd like to be very, very good
at something astonishing.
I don't seem to fit in.
All the girls I know are preoccupied
with becoming a wife.
What do you think about that?
Well, I've always wanted to be a bride,
but I don't really expect to be a wife.
Interesting.
-So you see the conundrum?
-I do.
I have the following thoughts to offer.
First: you can get married anytime
in your life, if you choose to do so.
That's true.
And two: if you choose a career,
you can buy a white dress yourself,
have it made to order,
and wear it whenever you want.
-[gasps] Why didn't I think of that?
-[chuckles]
I love that idea!
I'm going to be my own woman.
I'm a proponent
for making one's own way in the world.
Shall we? [exhales]
A certain young lady has impressed upon me
the many benefits
of taking the winter air.
Oh! [grunts]
Thank you.
Oh!
[both exhaling]
-Miss Barry?
-Hmm?
You are an inspiration,
and I hope I know you all my life.
I hope so too.
If you become a doctor, perhaps
you can discover a cure for old age.
[chuckles]
[Anne] And Miss Josephine Barry
is quite an intriguing character.
She's independent and never been married.
She's definitely my new role model.
She helped me see the light about...
my future.
You and Marilla are also my inspirations.
[Matthew] You don't say.
[Anne] I do say.
I'm going to be the heroine
in my own story.
-[Anne chuckles]
-[Matthew] Well, now...
[Anne] I am quite firm in my position
that romance need not be my goal in life.
Not that I'm thinking about boys at all,
because I'm not.
I choose myself.
And that way I'll never be disappointed.
[sighs]
[exhales]
[sobs]
[girls laughing]
If the key to a man's heart
is through his stomach...
Which it is.
...then we have to make sure
that this is the best shepherd's pie
that Gilbert has ever tasted.
Being a good cook shouldn't be very high
on the list of romantic attributes,
if you ask me.
If one was interested in romance,
which I'm not,
I'd like to be noticed for me,
not my dinner.
[both chuckling]
-You're so funny.
-I wasn't meaning to be funny.
[Diana] Oh.
So what's on the list?
My brain, Diana. My personality.
As in, who I am.
I like to believe
that's what truly matters.
If romance matters at all.
Which it doesn't.
Yes, it does!
[Ruby and Diana chuckling]
Don't you think Gilbert looks
even more handsome now that he's sad?
-I didn't notice.
-He does.
I know!
Ruby and Gilbert sitting in a tree...
-K-I-S-S--
-Minnie May, we're trying to work.
-I'm cooking.
-You're watching.
I told you, the only way you get
to be here with us is if you're quiet.
Don't interrupt, or you'll have to sit
with Great-Aunt Josephine.
No!
[girls giggle]
Excuse me, ma'am.
I'm being quiet.
Then you're the only one.
-Cackling hens. Lord help me.
-[chuckling]
Take the boy the godforsaken pie
before I suffer a mental collapse.
[exhales] Sorry, Aunt Josephine.
You girls have been
prattling on for hours about nothing.
A parlor should be a quiet haven.
Instead, it's unbearable.
"It is weak and silly
to say you cannot bear
what it is your fate
to be required to bear."
I beg your pardon?
Jane Eyre. Don't you just love it?
Ah. I've yet to reach that bit.
Chapter six, I believe.
Oh, and the ending makes me weep
every time. When Rochester--
For heaven's sake! Didn't we
just establish that I've only begun it?
Sorry.
I love crying over a good book, don't you?
Thus far I find the prose... invigorating.
More so if I could hear myself think.
We'll take the pie
straight over to Gilbert
as soon as we're done, Aunt Josephine.
Small mercies.
I'll report back on the ending.
[laughing]
Is she always so surly?
She's always scary.
The surly part just worsened
now that she's sad.
[Diana chuckles]
It must be awful beyond measure
to lose someone that you love deeply.
In a split second, a heartbeat,
they're gone forever...
and there is nothing that you can do
to change it or bring them back.
[sobs]
Anne?
You're crying on the potatoes.
I'm sorry.
[exhales deeply]
[clears throat]
[Diana] There's nothing wrong with saying,
"I'm sorry for your loss," Ruby.
-I'm going to say it because I am.
-[Ruby] You'll just make it worse.
His father just died.
-That's what people say when someone dies.
-I don't want you to upset him.
He's already upset
because his father just died.
Anne, please tell Ruby
it's all right to say--
I'm thinking perhaps I should get on home.
-What?
-Why?
I'm sure Marilla must be needing my help.
With something.
Don't be silly. We're almost there.
Hold my hand.
I'm so nervous!
We're sorry to intrude,
but we wanted you to have that.
We're sorry for your loss.
[Ruby] It's a shepherd's pie.
We made it together especially for you.
Thank you.
[Diana] We hope you like shepherd's pie.
Everyone likes shepherd's pie.
We hope it's a comfort to you, Gilbert.
[Diana] Anne made the topping.
She's a good cook.
But I would make a terrible wife!
[exhales]
Well, um, thank you for stopping by.
[door closes]
[chickens clucking]
Marilla, did you ever want to marry?
I...
There was a time
when I thought I would, but...
it wasn't possible.
Now, come set the table, please.
That sounds rather tragical.
Why wasn't it possible?
Were you a woman scorned?
I was not.
I was needed at home.
Forever?
Well... it's just how things worked out.
My mother never recovered
from my older brother's death.
She...
[sighs] I was needed here.
Now let me get the breakfast on.
I'll just add this on.
Now you'll settle up today, Matthew?
Hello, Gilbert.
Good day, Mr. Cuthbert.
So, uh...
bit of a cold snap, eh?
True enough.
Uh, the other day at the, um...
Uh, I-I noticed that you had
to leave a couple fields go fallow.
I haven't decided yet.
I'm sorry?
I'll let you know if I'm going to sell.
Ooh...
No, no. No, I just, um...
I, um...
I only wanted you to know
that me and my hand Jerry,
we'd be real happy to help out.
We'll come on over in the spring,
if you like,
get you back up and running.
That's very kind.
Truth is, uh...
I never really wanted to be a farmer.
Well, I'd best get to it.
As I was saying,
I wonder if you could settle up today.
Shame about that vessel. Word
on the street is you had crops aboard.
Vessel?
You didn't hear?
Ship went down on the way to the mainland.
Out of Charlottetown?
Mm. The vendor didn't have insurance,
so there's no recouping the loss.
It's a crying shame is what it is.
Now, that'll be
six dollars and ten, Matthew.
What was the name of the ship?
The Dal Marie.
[coins clinking]
Hey, Gilbert!
How's it going, Blythe?
Fine.
You've gotta come back to school, bud.
That ugly orphan's out of control.
What do you care?
We need a guy
to show her she's not so smart.
She's smart. Deal with it.
Why you gotta be like that, bud?
[chuckles]
Why don't you bust out a book
and take care of it yourself?
Yeah, right.
Good one, bud.
-I'll give you a tip, OK?
-Yeah?
I'm not your bud.
Yeah, right. [chuckles]
And if you ever hassle Anne again,
you'll regret it.
-Yeah, right.
What's your problem?
Ask me that again.
No, seriously.
Go ahead.
-Why you gotta be like that?
-Ask me!
Come on, bud. I don't get you.
Seriously, what's your problem?
[grunting]
[wind whistling]
Gilbert. I'm sorry to intrude.
Oh. No, not at all, Miss Cuthbert.
Please... take your time.
I wonder how he feels
about being so stationary.
John was a traveler at heart.
I believe the military
moved him around a lot in his early years.
He had the life he wanted then.
Full of adventure.
I'd heard he'd settled in Alberta?
Um...
We were a... large family for a while.
I'm the last. The only. [soft chuckle]
I'm sorry.
No, it's, uh...
We moved back here right after I was born.
[chuckles] The Prodigal Sons.
That's what he used to call us.
He took me back there recently. Alberta.
He wanted to see it again.
It's beautiful.
In school,
back when we were acquainted...
John talked of big cities,
of other parts of the world.
It seemed...
impossible.
Sounds good to me.
You resemble him in many ways.
There was nothing he could say
to talk me into leaving.
I wish...
He... he asked you to go with him?
I'll always be grateful to him
for thinking I'd be brave enough.
Obligation...
can be a prison.
I've always wondered...
I'll take my leave.
Please reach out to us
if you need anything at all.
Thank you, Miss Cuthbert.
[Anne exhales]
[sighs]
That is not what I meant.
[banging on door]
-Hello, Mary Joe. May I come in?
-Do you want Diana? She's out.
[Anne] No!
I'm sorry, Miss Barry, but I have
a pressing need to ask you something,
and you're my designated mentor.
[exhales]
[exhales deeply]
-Oh, I'm sorry.
-Oh...
It's quite all right, child.
[exhales]
I should go.
No, no.
[exhales deeply]
Ooh.
[exhales]
Emotion is rarely convenient
and often intolerable,
but I find, at the moment,
that I don't mind it.
I'm sorry.
Grief is confusing.
Grief is the price you pay for love,
you see.
So it's all right.
I miss my dear Gertrude very much.
And I loved her with all my heart.
-She was your kindred spirit.
-[sniffles]
Yes.
I admire you, Miss Josephine.
You're my role model.
Oh, dear! [chuckles]
I aspire to utilize my intellect fully,
and never succumb to frivolities
such as romance.
Then you wouldn't be much like me at all.
Well, you and I
are not the marrying kind.
Ah, but I was, in my way.
And we had a full
and wonderful life together.
I have no regrets.
That's all you really
have to decide, Anne.
To live a life with no regrets.
[indistinct conversation]
[exhales]
[sighs]